Welcome to the chapter on
testing microservices,
where we are first going to talk about
how Quarkus testing works
in practice and how to
implement a Quarkus microservice test case.
We will have an exercise
about that afterwards.
And then we are going to
have a look at how to use
mock frameworks to implement the
testing of microservices at large.
And we have an exercise
about that as well.
At the end of the chapter,
as usual, we have an end
of chapter review lab.
Quarkus builds testing frameworks
relying on the JUnit5 framework.
JUnit being the de facto standard for
creating and running unit tests in Java.
There is a quarkus-junit5 extension that pulls in
the JUnit 5 is a transitive dependency
and allows us to write unit tests
using Quarkus specifics. To
create a testing Quarkus,
obviously in addition to adding
the quarkus-junit5 test
extension to your project,
you have to override the Maven Surefire
Plugin version
in the build section.
You have got to fix the log Manager
and the Maven home directory.
That is all done by the
project code initiator.
If you are using Quarkus plugins,
create a goal to instantiate
a project template.
Then the manual work is basically creating
a test class in /src/main/
test, obviously, sorry,
/src/test/java directory as usual,
and annotating it with QuarkusTest.
QuarkusTest is an
annotation that comes from
the io.quarkus.test.junit package.
Then annotate each test method with
the standard Test annotation to
indicate which of the methods
the framework should execute.
Now of course, there are
also the usual before and
after methods that you can use.
When the tests are ready to run,
you simply use mvn test or mvn verify,
depending on what phase,
what stage of testing you want to perform.
Whether it's the unit tests
or integration tests.
Most IDEs contain handy tools to
run unit tests. In VSCodium
you are going to have the
command palette where you can
simply select the command
called run unit tests.
And you get a nice test report tab,
alongside with your code showing you long
each test took and what
its outcome status was.
So you have got nice timings.
For failed test,
you can dig down into the
method where it failed.
And you can also see what errors
have occurred during testing.
Of course,
tests obviously run in a
non-production environment,
so it's important to be able to configure
the environment that and the
dependencies that they should use.
So they need their own
configuration section,
of course, as we have already mentioned,
the moment you run mvn test or mvn
verify, the test configuration
profile is activated.
So anything prefixed with a %test
in your application.properties files
overrides the default that may have been
set using the property
name without a prefix.
So in the example that
we are looking at here,
in production or any other type of
execution environment where we do not
specify a specific value for this
particular property on the command line,
postgresql would have been
used, but in testing,
H2 database type would have been invoked.
Also when it comes to loading data,
if we are using a database
backend, of course,
we have to be able to
differentiate between
the various stages of our
applications lifecycle.
So we might have to load different
SQL data when running in dev mode then
in test. We can actually use the prefixes
of the configuration profiles with
great effect setting a quarkus.hibernate-orm.
sql-load-script to
various different implementations
or various different content
and setting that in production,
no such script should be loaded.
There is some other useful configuration
properties available for test mode,
such as and these do
not have a test prefix.
They directly affect the
behavior of Quarkus in test mode.
So quarkus.http.test-port is
the port that the application should use
when running in test mode, it is not 8080,
it is 8081 by default.
Same for TLS, SSL, or HTTPS.
It is not 8443 as is usual,
but 8444.
Then we have the native image builds,
we will talk about native
testing a little bit later.
If you are testing your native images,
there is a property
that specifies how long
the Quarkus is ready to wait for
the native build to complete.
It defaults to 5 minutes,
which should be enough,
but if your CPU is a little bit starved,
then you should probably set
this a little bit higher.
quarkus.test.native-image-profile is the profile,
the configuration profile to use
when testing the native image.
It defaults to prod.
And there is also the quarkus.test.profile which
you can use to specify
the configuration file to
use configuration profile to use when
testing using QuarkusTest and
that one defaults to test.
You may want to set this to something
else for integration testing,
Maven verify stage for example,
so that's why it's here.
quarkus.swagger-ui.always-include,
determines whether or not to
enable Swagger UI
when the prod profile is not enabled,
it defaults to false.
So if you do want Swagger
UI to be exposed,
set this to true, explicitly
if you are doing some sort of a
manual tests that might be handy.
And http.test-timeout is timeout
for obtaining a connection and
a response when using REST-assured client testing approach.
So these might prove to be useful
in tweaking in tuning your tests.
Now, when you need to
exercise a specific service,
of course, you need to be able
to connect to it somehow.
So you need to obtain a test
resource in your test class.
Luckily, test classes are
Quarkus Arc managed beans,
so CDI injection actually does work.
And you can simply inject an
instance of your service and
then exercises in any way you want.
This is a direct method
invocation of course,
but when you want to exercise your
applications rest endpoints remotely,
so from the viewpoint of
an external consumer,
you can use the @TestHTTPEndpoint annotation
in combination with @TestHTTPResource annotation,
providing the indication of what
kind of a service you want to inject
the URL to into a
fields member of your test class.
Then you simply use that endpoint without
any special initialization
in your test.
But it's quite awkward because you have
to deal with low level input streams,
output streams, InputStreamReaders
and so on.
You could do the same thing actually with
a static resource without
instantiating the service,
you just leave out the @TestHTTP
endpoint annotation and simply use
the @TestHTTPResource annotation to
point to a file in src test web app,
for example, or src main web app.
Again, these are very low level
methods of accessing resources.
So REST-assured might be a
better approach to that.
REST-assured is a library,
you will add it to your pom.xml with the test scope,
of course, because you
only need it in testing.
And it uses the Given-When-Then approach so to,
specify that whenever
certain condition occurs,
this is the consequence that we expect.
You can also use Hamcrest matchers
to validate the results
that have been obtained.
Let's have a look at how this works.
This is the injection code for
the URL for your tested service.
Of course, the service
class is specified with
the @TestHTTPEndpoint annotation.
We do import both,
RestAssured.given and
hamcrest is static methods.
Then in the test code we simply say that
whenever a get request
is sent to the endpoint,
we expect the body to
be or to contain hello.
Or if we are testing a static resource,
we simply say that whenever we send a get
request to obtain the Static resource,
then we expect that the body is or
contains this particular string.
Now in this case,
we do have 2 different resources
that we are working with,
one is our microservice instance in test,
and the other one is a static resource.
If all the endpoints that are,
that you are exercising in
the test case are or belong
to the same microservice.
You can actually use the @TestHTTPEndpoint annotation
on the class, on your test class.
And in that case, you do
not really have to even
specify what microservice
you are exercising.
You simply use the get method
of the REST-assured framework
and it will immediately
figure out that this get
actually refers to the
class-level annotation.
Of course, if it's a sub endpoint
of the top-level endpoint
exposed by your service,
then you would simply
specify a relative URL here
and then assert the expectations.
Your tests will obviously
sometimes need to be
supplied with some transient dependencies,
such as a database server.
Quarkus actually provides a
QuarkusTestResource annotation.
And when you annotate a test class
with this annotation, Quarkus will
simply handle the resources
lifecycle completely for you.
It will instantiate that test resource
and shut it down once the
tests have completed.
I can this following example
are MyServiceTest,
let's say it depends on a Derby Database.
We simply have to annotate it
with a @QuarkusTestResource,
pointing to the class called
DerbyDatabaseTestResource.
This class is one of the available test
resource extensions or test
resources services that had
been designed specifically for
Quarkus and there are others
such as an H2 database
TestResource and LDAP
ServerTestResource and even a
KubernetesMockServerTestResource
which you can send
resource creation commands to ends on.
The list of available tests
resources is constantly growing,
so have a look at the online
documentation to see which ones are
currently available and
which ones are available
for your specific version of Quarkus.
However, if you need to implement
your own test resource,
you can use the QuarkusTestResource
LifecycleManager interface and
implement your own type
of test resource handler.
As we have already mentioned,
testing native applications is a little
bit different from testing
a JVM application.
Specifically, dependency
injection is not available,
so we cannot test anything in
a native application from
within the application itself.
It functions as a completely
independent application,
so the only way you can test it
is from without, not from within.
Send it API requests,
exercise it's exposed features.
There's nothing we can do about the
internals without a low level debugger.
So when you are packaging the application,
just simply select the native mode,
we already know that.
And then once the native
image had finished his work,
you have a native executable.
You would annotate the test class with
the @NativeImageTest annotation
and then whenever you run
the tests in native mode,
so you would use mvn test
-Pnative to tell it to
run only the classes that are
annotated with a NativeImageTest.
Let's move on to the next video,
which is a guided exercise and we will
take a look at how to implement
tests in it. See you there.